ticdc: add ticdc simple protocol documentation (#16753)
pingcap/docs: ticdc/ticdc-simple-protocol.md

- Destination: TiCDC sends `WATERMARK` events to all partitions of the corresponding topic.

### BOOTSTRAP

- Generation time:
    - After creating a new changefeed, before the first DML event of a table is sent, TiCDC sends a `BOOTSTRAP` event to the downstream to build the table schema.
    - Additionally, TiCDC sends `BOOTSTRAP` events periodically to allow newly joined consumers to build the table schema. The default interval is 120 seconds or every 10000 messages. You can adjust the sending interval by configuring the `send-bootstrap-interval-in-sec` and `send-bootstrap-in-msg-count` parameters in the `sink` configuration.
    - If a table does not receive any new DML messages within 30 minutes, the table is considered inactive. TiCDC stops sending `BOOTSTRAP` events for the table until new DML events are received.
- Destination: By default, TiCDC sends `BOOTSTRAP` events to all partitions of the corresponding topic. You can adjust the sending strategy by configuring the `send-bootstrap-to-all-partition` parameter in the sink configuration.

## Message consumption methods

> Because the TiCDC Simple protocol does not include the schema information of the table when sending DML messages, the downstream needs to receive DDL or BOOTSTRAP messages and cache the schema information of the table when consuming DML messages. When receiving a DML message, the downstream can obtain the corresponding table schema information from the cache through the `table` name and `schemaVersion` field in the DML message, and then correctly consume the DML message.

Author: ```suggestion
Because the TiCDC Simple protocol does not include the schema information of the table when sending a DML message, the downstream needs to receive the DDL or BOOTSTRAP message and cache the schema information of the table before consuming a DML message. When receiving a DML message, the downstream obtains the corresponding table schema information from the cache by searching the `table` name and `schemaVersion` fields of the DML message, and then correctly consumes the DML message.
```

      "name":"John Doe",
      "score":"90.5"
   }
}
```

The fields in the preceding JSON data are explained as follows:

| Field         | Type    | Description                                               |
| ------------- | ------- | --------------------------------------------------------- |
| `version`     | Number  | The version number of the protocol, which is currently `1`. |
| `database`    | String  | The name of the database.                                 |
| `table`       | String  | The name of the table.                                    |
| `tableID`     | Number  | The ID of the table.                                      |
| `type`        | String  | The DML event type, including `INSERT`, `UPDATE`, and `DELETE`. |
| `commitTs`    | Number  | The commit timestamp when the DML statement execution is completed in the upstream. |
| `buildTs`     | Number  | The UNIX timestamp when the message is successfully encoded within TiCDC. |
| `schemaVersion` | Number | The schema version number of the table when the DML message is encoded. |
| `data`        | Object  | The inserted data, where the field name is the column name and the field value is the column value. |

> The `INSERT` event only contains the `data` field, and does not contain the `old` field.

Reviewer: "only" looks confusing here

| `buildTs`     | Number  | The UNIX timestamp when the message is successfully encoded within TiCDC. |
| `tableSchema` | Object  | The schema information of the table. For more details, see [TableSchema definition](#tableschema-definition). |

## Message generation and sending rules

### DDL

- Generation time: TiCDC sends DDL events after all transactions before this DDL event have been sent.
- Destination: TiCDC sends DDL events to all partitions of the corresponding topic.

### DML

- Generation time: TiCDC sends DML events in the order of the `commitTs` of the transaction.
- Destination: TiCDC sends DDL events to the corresponding partition of the corresponding topic according to the user-configured dispatch rules.

### WATERMARK

- Generation time: TiCDC sends `WATERMARK` events periodically to mark the replication progress of a changefeed. The current interval is 1 second.
- Destination: TiCDC sends `WATERMARK` events to all partitions of the corresponding topic.

### BOOTSTRAP

- Generation time:
    - After creating a new changefeed, before the first DML event of a table is sent, TiCDC sends a `BOOTSTRAP` event to the downstream to build the table schema.

>     - Additionally, TiCDC sends `BOOTSTRAP` events periodically to allow newly joined consumers to build the table schema. The default interval is 120 seconds or every 10000 messages. You can adjust the sending interval by configuring the `send-bootstrap-interval-in-sec` and `send-bootstrap-in-msg-count` parameters in the sink configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Additionally, TiCDC sends `BOOTSTRAP` events periodically to allow newly joined consumers to build the table schema. The default interval is 120 seconds or every 10000 messages. You can adjust the sending interval by configuring the `send-bootstrap-interval-in-sec` and `send-bootstrap-in-msg-count` parameters in the `sink` configuration.
```

Because the TiCDC Simple protocol does not include the schema information of the table when sending DML messages, the downstream needs to receive DDL or BOOTSTRAP messages and cache the schema information of the table when consuming DML messages. When receiving a DML message, the downstream can obtain the corresponding table schema information through the `table` name and `schemaVersion` field in the DML message, and then correctly consume the DML message.

The following describes how to correctly consume DML messages based on DDL or BOOTSTRAP messages. According to preceding descriptions, the following information is known:

- Each DML message contains a `schemaVersion` field to mark the schema version number of the table corresponding to the DML message.
- Each DDL message contains a `tableSchema` and `preTableSchema` field to mark the schema information of the table before and after the DDL event.
- Each BOOTSTRAP message contains a `tableSchema` field to mark the schema information of the table corresponding to the BOOTSTRAP message.

The consumption methods are introduced in the following two scenarios.

### Scenario 1: The consumer starts consuming from the beginning

> In this scenario, the consumer starts consuming from the beginning, so the consumer can receive all DDL and BOOTSTRAP messages of the table. In this case, the consumer can obtain the schema information of the table through the `table` name and `schemaVersion` field in the DML message. The detailed process is as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this scenario, the consumer starts consuming from the creation of a table, so the consumer can receive all DDL and BOOTSTRAP messages of the table. In this case, the consumer can obtain the schema information of the table through the `table` name and `schemaVersion` field in the DML message. The detailed process is as follows:
```

![TiCDC Simple Protocol consumer scene 1](/media/ticdc/ticdc-simple-consumer-1.png)

### Scenario 2: The consumer starts consuming from the middle

> When a new consumer joins the consumer group, it might start consuming from the middle, so it might miss the previous DDL and BOOTSTRAP messages. In this case, the consumer might receive some DML messages before obtaining the schema information of the table. Therefore, the consumer needs to wait for a period of time until it receives the DDL or BOOTSTRAP message to obtain the schema information of the table. Because TiCDC sends BOOTSTRAP messages periodically, the consumer can always obtain the schema information of the table within a period of time. The detailed process is as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a new consumer joins the consumer group, it might start consuming from the middle, so it might miss earlier DDL and BOOTSTRAP messages of the table. In this case, the consumer might receive some DML messages before obtaining the schema information of the table. Therefore, the consumer needs to wait for a period of time until it receives the DDL or BOOTSTRAP message to obtain the schema information of the table. Because TiCDC sends BOOTSTRAP messages periodically, the consumer can always obtain the schema information of the table within a period of time. The detailed process is as follows:
```

        {
        "name":"score",
        "dataType":{
            "mysqlType":"float",
            "charset":"binary",
            "collate":"binary",
            "length":12
        },
        "nullable":true,
        "default":null
        }
    ],
    "indexes":[
        {
        "name":"primary",
        "unique":true,
        "primary":true,
        "nullable":false,
        "columns":[
            "id"
        ]
        }
    ]
}
```

The preceding JSON data is explained as follows:

| Field      | Type   | Description                                                         |
| ---------- | ------ | ------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `schema`   | String | The name of the database.                                           |
| `table`    | String | The name of the table.                                              |
| `tableID`  | Number | The ID of the table.                                                |
| `version`  | Number | The schema version number of the table.                             |
| `columns`  | Array  | The column information, including the column name, data type, whether it can be null, and the default value. |

> | `indexes`  | Array  | The index information, including the index name, whether it is unique, whether it is a primary key, and the index column. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `indexes`  | Array  | The index information, including the index name, whether it is unique, whether it is a primary key, and the index columns. |
```

        "primary":true,
        "nullable":false,
        "columns":[
            "id"
        ]
}
```

The preceding JSON data is explained as follows:

| Field      | Type   | Description                                                         |
| ---------- | ------ | ------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `name`     | String | The name of the index.                                              |
| `unique`   | Boolean | Whether the index is unique.                                       |
| `primary`  | Boolean | Whether the index is a primary key.                                |
| `nullable` | Boolean | Whether the index can be null.                                     |
| `columns`  | Array  | The column names included in the index.                             |

### mysqlType reference table

The following table describes the value range of the `mysqlType` field in the TiCDC Simple protocol and its type in TiDB (Golang) and Avro (Java). When you need to parse DML messages, you can correctly parse the data according to this table and the `mysqlType` field in the DML message, depending on the protocol and language you use.

> **TiDB Type (Golang)** represents the type of the corresponding `mysqlType` when it is processed in TiDB and TiCDC (Golang). **Avro Type (Java)** represents the type of the corresponding `mysqlType` when it is encoded into Avro format messages.
> 
> | MySQL Type | Value Range | TiDB Type (Golang) | Avro Type (Java) |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**TiDB type (Golang)** represents the type of the corresponding `mysqlType` when it is processed in TiDB and TiCDC (Golang). **Avro type (Java)** represents the type of the corresponding `mysqlType` when it is encoded into Avro format messages.

| MySQL type | Value range | TiDB type (Golang) | Avro type (Java) |
```
